Sentieon software for DNA pipeline analysis

2021-04-30
Release 202010.02
Feature:  Maintenance update of the TNseq algorithm.
Feature: Added support in util for amplicon specific primer clipping.
Feature: Added support to access s3 objects from a region different than the one hosting the bucket. 
Feature: Improved speed of TNhaplotyper2 for extreme depth cases.
Feature: Introduced β-version of STAR aligner.
Bug-Fix: Solved an issue when using CRAM files that could incorrectly report reads as missing the RG under very rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in CoverageMetrics that could cause a small run-to-run results difference.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue when using CRAM that could drop certain malformed reads from output.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNhaplotyper2 that could cause an error when using the --bam_out option.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNfilter that would cause an error when encountering unrecognized reference bases.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util sort --umi_post_process that would cause an incorrect BI/BD tag.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue when reading BAM files with convoluted PGs that would cause a crash. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNhaplotyper, TNhaplotyper2 and TNscope that could cause a crash when using options --given and --bam_output.
Bug-Fix: Solve issue in TNhaplotyper2 that could produce incorrect PS values.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in some metrics algorithms that was producing trailing tabs causing an empty column output. 
Bug-Fix: Added additional error checks and error reporting.

2021-02-15
Release 202010.01
Feature: Added support in TNhaplotyper2 for genotyping given alleles.
Feature: Improved TNscope method for handling read trimming.
Feature: Added support in TNscope for amplicon specific primer removal.
Bug-Fix: Added additional error checks and error reporting.  
Bug-Fix: Fixed issue in TNscope that could report incorrect AD numbers at tri-allelic sites.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in ContaminationModel that could calculate incorrect estimates when using very sparse pileups.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could cause a crash for inputs with high depth close to the start of a non-canonical chromosome.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in umi consensus that could cause the sequence and BI/BD to be inconsistent when using duplex UMI.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in ContaminationModel that could cause a crash under rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could cause a crash when using the Sentieon libraries with bcl2fastq.

2020-11-16
Release 202010
Feature: Reduced memory usage when outputting CRAM files.
Feature: Maintenance update of the TNseq algorithm.
Feature: Added DNBSEQ platform to support BGI sequencers.
Feature: Improve speed of umi consensus when not outputting BI/BD tags.
Feature: Added support of BGZF compressed interval list files as well as VCF and VCF.gz files.
Feature: Modified the type of the AD, QSS and RPA FORMAT field in the VCF.
Feature: Override unlimited stack size limit in Linux to prevent Linux bug with thread local storage allocation.
Feature: Using an empty interval bed file will result in no processing done, as if the interval had 0 length.
Bug-Fix: Added additional error checks and error reporting.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would cause a crash when using BAM files containing reads without a sequence.
Bug-Fix: Added option in util sort to handle supplementary reads after processing with the umi tools.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in umi consensus that could cause results to depend on the number of threads.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could cause an out of bound memory access error in very rare circumstances
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util sort that could cause it to hang for single threaded jobs under very rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in umi consensus that could cause a segmentation fault.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in umi consensus that produced a non informative group 0 histogram when using --min_reads 1.
Bug-Fix: Error out when creating CRAM file containing reads beyond the reference end.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in plot that would not respect the SENTIEON_TMPDIR environmental variable.

2020-09-04
Release 201911.01
Feature: Reduced number of temporary files in util sort.
Feature: Improved UMI consensus calculation for INDELs.
Feature: Reduced memory usage in UMI tool.
Feature: Added support in umi extract to read FASTQ files containing UMI tags already extracted.
Feature: Added support in Dedup metrics to report QCFAIL reads if present.
Feature: Made the rsID field population from dbSNP more robust.  
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would cause a crash when using CRAM files and unmapped reads of zero length.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in SequenceArtifactMetricsAlgo that could cause a negative result. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in BWA that could cause an error when using a value larger than 520g for bwt_max_mem option.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in the vcflib python library that could cause an error processing VCFs from SVSolver
Bug-Fix: Added additional error checks and error reporting.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in umi extract that could cause a crash.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could slow down merging of large output files.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could generate an incorrect CRAM index file when a slice contained multi contigs.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in licsrvr for Mac that could prevent it from stopping when running the --stop command.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could cause a crash when using CRAM files and reads longer than 128KBases.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util sort that could cause a crash with very large SAM records.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could cause an out of bound memory access error in very rare circumstances
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in DNAscope that could produce no GT when using --given.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in CollectVCMetrics that could cause incorrect results for INDELs straddling beyond the input interval.

2019-11-26
Release 201911
Feature: Introduced β-version of tools for processing reads containing UMI sequences.
Feature: Introduced β-version of software for ARM based CPUs.
Feature: Added support in ReadWriter to filter reads based on the mapping quality.
Feature: Maintenance update of BWA
Feature: Improved speed of util sort on high CPU count servers.
Feature: Added support in ReadWriter to filter reads based on their flags. 
Feature: Added support to GVCFtyper to output very small AF numbers in scientific notation.
Feature: Modified the type of the AD FORMAT field in the VCF.
Feature: Added support in TNscope to output ID and MATEID in its BND output.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in VarCal that could cause a numeric overflow
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could cause a segmentation fault under very rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope calling SVs that would output an invalid AD value for the normal sample, if present.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in DNAscope that would prevent generating a GVCF when using sharded mode.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in VarCal that would cause an issue when using a VCF containing an INF value annotation.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper and DNAscope that would not trim common bases in REF and ALT in a variant with a spanning delete.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope SV calling that could shift the position by a few bases under rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that would create a SOR=nan for large cohorts
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in the DNAscope Smith-Waterman that could cause a results difference in very rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could cause an error when inputing sharded VCF files indexed by other tools.
Bug-Fix: Added additional error checks and error reporting.

2019-10-15
Release 201808.08
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could create an incorrect tbi index file.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in DNAscope and Haplotyper that could cause an assertion when using the --bam_output option.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in LocusCollector that could cause an assertion when creating a compressed score file. 

2019-06-30
Release 201808.07
Feature: Improved speed of QualCal on high CPU count servers.
Feature: Improved speed of Dedup on high CPU count servers.
Feature: Improved speed of GVCFtyper merge for large cohorts.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue preventing reading CRAM files with slices straddling across multiple contigs; the Sentieon tools do not generate such CRAM files.
Bug-Fix: Added additional error checks and error reporting.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would cause an error when using BAM files containing incomplete PG records.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that would cause an error when using phased GT annotation.

2019-05-14
Release 201808.06
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that could cause an error when using multinomial genotyping and more than 1000 samples.

2019-04-17
Release 201808.05
Feature: Improved speed of BWA alignment.
Feature: Changed default CRAM output version to 3.0.
Feature: Reduced memory usage when outputting CRAM files.
Feature: Added error checking in tnhapfilter.
Feature: Improved accuracy of DNAscope model.
Feature: Removed Realigner stages from the example files.
Feature: Added option in Haplotyer and GVCFtyper to use additional genotyping models.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNhaplotyer2 that could cause a run to run variation in the annotation calculation in 1 out of 100 runs.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in BWA that could cause an error when using an extremely large bwt_max_mem option.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could cause an error when reading a CRAM file generated by cramtools.
Bug-Fix: Improved error reporting.

2018-12-20
Release 201808.03
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that set the wrong default settings.

2018-12-15
Release 201808.02
Feature: Improved speed of TNscope.
Feature: Added option --trim_soft_clip to TNscope, TNhaplotyper and TNHaplotyper2.
Feature: Added capability for output BAM from --bam_output option to keep the input BAM RG information.
Feature: Added option --disable_detector to TNscope to control the type of variants called.
Feature: Added support in TNscope SV calling to more accurately represent large INS.
Feature: Added mode to util fqidx to extract a fraction of the reads.
Feature: Added support in GVCFtyper merge mode to allow input files hosted in an object storage location.
Feature: Added support for using multiple --interval options.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that could call a false positive in a site that has a germline call and is neighboring another SNV. 
Bug-Fix: Improved error reporting.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in sentieon script that could prevent using a demo license on a shell that is not BASH.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would prevent BED files containing an interval with identical start and end.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in DNAModelApply that would cause an error when the input VCF file is empty.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in plot that could cause it to run longer than necessary.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in DNAModelApply that would cause an error when over-scheduling.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util sort that could cause an assertion error when over-scheduling.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in plot that would generate BQSR PDF plots without AA and AAA context covariate.

2018-09-30
Release 201808.01
Feature: Changed the way to run licsrvr and licclnt to require the use of the bin/sentieon wrapper.
Feature: Improved performance of DNAscope and Machine learning model.
Feature: Improved speed of Insert Size plotting when the sample has very large insert sizes.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that could create a non conforming VCF when doing joint calling of DNAscope results.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in DNAModelApply that would cause an error when the input file does not contain a ModelID.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper when using the --given option that would generate a VCF without the  LowQual filter definition in the header.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in tnhapfilter tool to include tumor sample in the header of the VCF.

2018-08-31
Release 201808
Feature: Added support in ReadWriter for customized flag read filters.
Feature: Added support to modify the read group information of an input bam file.
Feature: Added support in TNscope and TNhaplotyper to output a bam including local reassembly of the reads.
Feature: Added support in TNModelApply to include command line to the VCF output.
Feature: Added support to QualCalFilter to keep the base quality scores before recalibration.
Feature: Introduced TNhaplotyper2 algorithm
Feature: Added support for outputting CRAM v 3.0 files.
Feature: Added support in Haplotyper, DNAscope and GVCFtyper to input the expected heterozygosity value used to compute prior likelihoods.
Feature: Updated interface of plot to better match other tools.
Feature: Added support for machine learning model for DNAscope
Feature: Modified the help for driver options to make it more user friendly.
Feature: Improved speed in Dedup.
Feature: Added support in Haplotyper, Genotyper and DNAscope to include @PG line in the output header of the --bam_output argument.
Feature: Updated the @PG information when processing in distribution mode to make it more informative.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper on DNAscope GVCFs that may report incorrect phasing on a multi-allelic variant
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util sort that would cause an error in older CPUs.
Bug-Fix: Added additional error checks and error reporting.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in LocusCollector that would cause a crash when running 2 commands in parallel outputting to the same file.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could create a GVCF with REF allele incorrectly set to N under very rare conditions.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that may use uninitialized values 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in AlignmentStat that would report an incorrect command line in the header of the output file.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could slow down the startup when the LIBDIR contains many files and is stored in a NFS.

2018-07-15
Release 201711.05
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could create a GVCF file that does not cover the entire region under rare circumstances.

2018-06-19
Release 201711.04
Feature: Added support to all BAM writing tools to preserve existing PG tags in the header.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that could cause an error with references containing small contigs.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in SVSolver that could cause a segmentation fault.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper when using the --bam_output option that could generate a debug bam file incompatible with other tools.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in ApplyVarCal that would generate a non-compliant list of FILTERs if the input file already had existing filters.

2018-04-30
Release 201711.03
Feature: Reduced memory usage in GVCFtyper.
Feature: Improved the speed of BWA alignment.
Feature: Added command line to output of metrics tools.
Feature: Reduced memory usage in util sort.
Feature: Reduced TNscope SV calling runtime for very large samples
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper merge when using --split_by_sample that would cause an error in merging files with a large number of samples.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in WgsMetricsAlgo that would cause an error under very rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Reduced memory usage in WgsMetricsAlgo and SequenceArtifactMetricsAlgo tools.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in SequenceArtifactMetricsAlgo that would produce an error when using reference FASTA files with non-ACGT bases.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in WgsMetricsAlgo that would cause an error when the --coverage_cap argument is not within the valid rage.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in SequenceArtifactMetricsAlgo that would cause an error when the --context_size argument is not within the valid rage.

2018-03-14
Release 201711.02
Feature: Added support for BWA shm mode.
Feature: Added QC metrics tools: BaseDistributionByCycle, QualityYield, WgsMetricsAlgo, SequenceArtifactMetricsAlgo. 
Feature: Improved speed in TNscope when calling SVs.
Feature: Added support in TNscope to show progress report during the SV calling.
Feature: Reduced memory utilization in TNscope while calling SVs. 
Feature: Introduced β-version of Windows based tools.
Feature: Improved speed for the Windows version.
Feature: Added additional error checks and error reporting.
Feature: Modified the default behavior in DNAscope when only calling short variants to filter out chimeric reads during genotyping.
Feature: Reduced memory usage in GVCFtyper.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that would cause an error if the input bam file contained reads where the cigar is composed solely of soft and hard clips.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that could cause a segmentation fault when using an incomplete bam file.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that would cause a segmentation fault under rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper and DNAscope that could cause an error when using the bam_output option.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Realign that would not do the proper read pairing when dealing with secondary alignments.
Bug-Fix: Maintenance update on the SVsolver algorithm.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in licsrvrv for Windows that would prevent it from working with HTTP proxy servers with authentication. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that would produce VCF records with non-conformant MQ0 when the input GVCFs include MQ0 annotation.

2018-01-09
Release 201711.01
Feature: Improved speed in QualCal for very small jobs.
Feature: Added support in licsrvr to report the version.
Feature: Added support in licsrvr to report an update in the license.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in licsrvr that would prevent it from working with HTTP proxy servers that return auth schemes in multiple header lines.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper, DNAscope, TNhaplotyper and TNscope that could cause an "illegal instruction" error in AWS.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that would produce and "Error in function boost" under rare conditions.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util that would prevent running vcfconvert on a compressed vcf.gz file.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper and DNAscope that could cause an error when using the --bam_output option.
Bug-Fix: Reduced memory consumption in Realigner.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNhaplotyper and TNscope that could incorrectly filter a variant as present in the Panel of Normals when the variant is covered by a DEL present in the PoN.
Bug-Fix: Change emit_conf value in the sample scripts to use the default value.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNhaplotyper and TNscope that could produce an assertion error when using a fractured bed file with small intervals close to each other.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that would prevent the job from finishing when prune_factor is set to 0.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in bwa that prevented it from working on certain older AMD cpus.

2017-11-20
Release 201711
Feature: Added support in Haplotyper to output a bam including local reassembly of the reads.
Feature: Introduced β-version of new functionality for applying a Machine Learning model to help with variant filtration in TNscope.
Feature: Introduced β-version of new functionality for Python based recipe creation to drive the Sentieon tools.
Feature: Introduced β-version of new product DNAscope for germline variant calling and germline structural variant calling.
Feature: Added support for printing the command line to stderr log, usually as the first line, before the license check.
Feature: Added support in QualCal to calculate recalibration tables based on PU if present.
Feature: Added support in ApplyVarCal to use both SNP and INDEL models in a single command line.
Feature: Added additional error checks and error reporting.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope SV that would cause an error if the input bam file contained realigned reads with no matching bases.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would cause a crash when using a bam file containing reads with invalid mate tid.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that could cause a job to incorrectly think there are not enough licenses available when the communication to the license server is slow.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that failed to detect long INDELs under rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in ApplyVarCal that caused the output VCF file to miss the SentieonCommandLine in the header.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that prevented modifying the max_normalAlt_active option, which could cause loss of variants in areas of extreme depth.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GCBias that would report results for a RG that did not contain any reads.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util that would cause a crash when the bam contained reads whose tid is out of bound.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util stream that would not include the full path of util binary in the PG line of the bam header.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in AlignmentStat that would produce an inaccurate PCT_ADAPTER value when the adapter_seq is not null.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in ApplyVarCal that would produce incorrect results when using sensitivity 0.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in the help of TNhaplotyper that would misrepresente the default pcr_indel_model.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in bwa that prevented it from working on certain older AMD cpus.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in InsertSizeMetrics that woudl generate a header using space instead of tab.

2017-10-13
Release 201704.04
Feature: Added zlib library as a shared library to package.

2017-09-20
Release 201704.03
Feature: Added support for using a HTTP proxy with authentication. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would prevent recalibration tables from older releases from being applied when the bam file RGs have a defined PU.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Realigner that could cause an error under extremely rare circumstances when reads in the input file have inconsistent information. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that could incorrectly error out when the tumor_contamination_frac parameter is set to 0.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would prevent using bam files with Contigs lasrger than 300M.

2017-08-17
Release 201704.02
Feature: Added support in QualCal to allow input of cycle_val_max parameter.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNhaplotyper in --detect_pon that would produce a non-compliant VCF.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope in --given mode that would not report records on areas of 0 depth coverage.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in CoverageMetrics that would report the wrong cumulative_coverage_counts and coverage.statistics when the input bam had multipe different read groups.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in InsertSizeMetricAlgo, GCBias and CoverageMetrics that could report the wrong results for extremely deep (>600x) samples.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Realigner that would cause an error when the input bam file had the wrong MC tag type.

2017-06-10
Release 201704.01
Feature: Added additional checks on the input bam files.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Dedup that would cause the algorithm to hang when the bam file has more than 4 billion reads (200x WGS with 150 BP reads).
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in QualCal that would slow down the calculation.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that could report the wrong reference allele for structural variants.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could cause a job to hang under extremely rare circumstances.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that could cause extra tags in the bam header to disappear.

2017-05-12
Release 201704
Feature: Maintenance update of algorithms.
Feature: Added support for defining a temporary directory, instead of using PWD.
Feature: Added support for type 2 VCF index files.
Feature: Added additional error checks and error reporting.
Feature: Added support for SAC annotation and Allele Specific annotations.
Feature: Added support for additional read filtering: MapQualFilter and OverclippingFilter.
Feature: Added support for CollectVCMetrics.
Feature: Added support for Deduplication equivalent to using bam files sorted by read name.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in license control that would prevent run when the SENTIEON_AUTH_DATA is of a specific length.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would not properly parse bed files containing both space and tab delimited fields.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that would report the wrong REF allele for structural variants.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in CoverageMetrics that would produce the wrong summary mean coverage when not using a bed file.

2017-03-15
Release 201611.03
Feature: Added support for more options for base quality score recalibration.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that could report an incorrect GT or PL when the input GVCFs had been processed with different bed files.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Realign that caused reads close to the edge of the contig to be realigned beyond the contig boundary.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Realign that caused a segmentation fault when using known sites VCF including symbolic variants.
Bug-Fix: Added support for Realign to update NM and MD tags in the realigned reads.

2017-01-31
Release 201611.02
Feature: Added support for calling given known variants in Genotyper, Haplotyper, and TNscope.
Feature: Added support for outputting physical phasing information of variants in TNhaplotyper and TNscope.
Feature: Added support for base quality correction in streaming mode in util.
Feature: Maintenance update of HsMetricAlgo. 
Feature: Removed redundant nthr argument in VarCal. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope causing excessive memory utilization in the structural variant calling.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope causing a segmentation fault when an output file is not set. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in QualCal in --plot mode that would incorrectly report the need for known sites.
Bug-Fix: Solved incorrect description of filter low_t_alt_frac in TNscope.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Realign that may set the incorrect bin to the unmapped reads of a mapped/unmapped pair that got its positions adjusted close to a bin boundary.

2016-12-16
Release 201611.01
Feature: Removed TNscope temporary files novo_hap.data and novo_sv.data.
Feature: Increased default license timeout from client request.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue causing jobs to hang at the end of the processing when there were issues in the network communication.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope causing an assertion error when pairend reads have inconsistent flags. 
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNscope that incorrectly considered reads marked as duplicates in the calculation.

2016-11-20
Release 201611
Feature: Added --emit_mode all in GVCFtyper.
Feature: Updates to β-version of TNscope.
Feature: Speed improvement to the alignment and sorting tools.
Feature: Added ContaminationAssessment algorithm for contamination estimation.
Feature: Added detection of truncated vcf input and corrupted cram input files.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in VarCal that would not produce a plot file when the recalibration failed.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in VarCal that could cause a segmentation fault when there were not enough licenses for the requested threads.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in util sort that would cause a segmentation fault when converting an empty sam file to bam file.

2016-09-17
Release 201608.01
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNseq in tumor-only mode that added to the output VCF an empty column for non-existent NORMAL sample.

2016-08-31
Release 201608
Feature: Introduced β-version of new product TNscope for Tumor-Normal somatic variant calling and structural variant calling.
Feature: Reduced peak memory utilization in klib for alignment.
Feature: Speed improvement in the input file loading of GVCFtyper.
Feature: Speed improvement in the Haplotyper algorithm. 
Feature: Made VarCal more robust when building the VQSR gaussian models.
Feature: Cleared up certain error messages to make them more user friendly.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Genotyper that caused a segmentation fault when using var_type BOTH.

2016-07-25
Release 201606.02
Feature: Reduced memory utilization in GVCFtyper to reduce requirements for analyss of large (4000+) cohorts.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNsnv that created VCF files non-conforming to the standard.
 
2016-07-15
Release 201606.01
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that prevented licsrvr from serving licenses when the user group list is longer than 1000 characters.

2016-06-31
Release 201606
Feature: Maintenance update of TNhaplotyper algorithm (still in β).
Feature: Added support for RNAseq variant calling.
Feature: Added online help.
Feature: Added support for interval padding.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that produced no output in TNhaplotyper when using a PoN or no normal sample data.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue preventing BED file with a header from being used.

2016-05-31
Release 201603.03
Feature: Added method for inputting long list of VCF files to GVCFtyper .
Feature: Added command line to VCF header.
Feature: Added support for additional annotations on all variant callers.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue producing an assertion error when too few variants are called.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue reporting the wrong assembly in the VCF header when the FASTA file cannot be interpreted correctly.

2016-04-29
Release 201603.02
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNhaplotyper that incorrectly filtered INDELs.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in TNsnv and TNhaplotyper that made the dbsnp a required argument.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that creates non-conforming vcf files when calling variants in locations where the REF base is M.

2016-03-25
Release 201603.01
Feature: Speed improvement in the VQSR algorithm.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that caused VQSR to apply to the wrong type of variants when the variants had a prior LOD annotation.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that slowed down dedup optical duplicate calculation when the number of duplicates at one locus is too large.

2016-03-11
Release 201603
Feature: Maintenance update of algorithms.
Feature: Added TNseq-snv algorithm for Tumor-Normal and Tumor only somatic variant calling.
Feature: Added support for CRAM files.
Feature: Added support for Haploid and Polyploid samples.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that droped reads when the reads extended beyond the contig boundary.

2016-02-12
Release 201601.01
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper that produced the wrong variant quality on sites with AAF > 0.5 when using more than 50 samples.

2016-01-31
Release 201601
Feature: Added support for using interval files only on the realign target creation portion of Realigner.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue preventing license server from running in systems with an Infiniband interface.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue when merging bam files that marks reads as unmapped when their mate is unmapped.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper in gvcf mode when intervals are used that causes missed variants when the first interval of a contig contains no variants.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in GVCFtyper to remove stray/empty SB annotations from the output VCF.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue causing the corruption of the output VCF under rare conditions involving large number of samples.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that prevented using bam index files without the optional metadata pseudo bin.

2015-12-17
Release 2015011.01
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in QualCal algorithm that slowed down execution when using bam files with large number of Read Groups.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in ReadWriter algorithm that produced an incorrect bam file when using a recalibration table and an input bam that had PGZ auxiliary data.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in VQSR algorithm that caused the execution to hang when using the results from joint calling of more than 20 samples.

2015-11-30
Release 201511
Feature: Maintenance update of algorithms.
Feature: Added depth metrics tool.
Feature: Added pcr_indel_model flag to Haplotyper tool.
Feature: Added phasing information to the output of Haplotyper.
Feature: Added support for compressed vcf/gvcf input and output.
Feature: Added support for picard style interval files.
Feature: Added wrapper script to remove requirement of LD_LIBRARY_PATH environmental library.
Bug-Fix: Added FILTER definition to the VQSR output file header.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would cause an Out of Memory error in BQSR when using interval files.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that would cause a crash in IndelRealigner when the bam file has reads with supplementary alignment.

2015-09-20
Release 201509
Feature: Reduced resource requirements, including reducing the required maximum number of open files in the system.
Feature: Various improvements in error reporting.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that prevented using multiple bam files as input to algorithms that produced another bam file.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue that prevented running BQSR when using Read Groups containing spaces.
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Haplotyper that could cause an incorrect variant quality score calculation in low coverage regions. The change could be up to 2% in the quality score, for 1 in 100000 variants.

2015-09-02
Release 201508.01
Bug-Fix: Solved issue in Realign algorithm that may cause an error when using known sites.

2015-08-31
Release 201508
Feature: Enhanced error reporting and error handling when dealing with inconsistent input data
Feature: Packaged BWA 0.7.12, and removed non-official options for BWA interface. The results of the packaged BWA are identical to the official BWA 0.7.12
Feature: Grouped the temporary files for VQSR plotting into a single file
Feature: New license server for large clusters
Bug-Fix: Solved error in Haplotype Caller when using gvcf emit mode for joint calling 
Bug-Fix: Solved error in joint calling GVCFtyper that prevented using more than 20 samples

2015-06-30
Release 201506
Feature: Added Hybrid Selection Analysis metrics
Feature: Unified Genotyper default behavior is to call only SNP variants, to be consistent with GATK 3.3 default behavior 
Bug-Fix: Alignment metrics properly reports unmapped reads when both mates in the pair are unmapped
Alpha-Feature: Added initial support for joint variant calling of multiple samples that have ben previously processed individually

2015-06-15
Release 201505.02
Feature: Speed improvement in Alignment stage
Feature: Speed improvement in Dedup stage
Feature: Added support for temporary bam files

2015-06-09
Release 201505.01
Bug-Fix: Issue running VQSR in Mac platform

2015-05-31
Release 201505
Feature: Speed improvement via AVX optimization
Feature: Standarized option naming convention
Feature: tmp folder moved to the same location as the job
Feature: Added validation checks to input files
Bug-fix: Solved run to run differences in BQSR when reads have quality scores of 0
Bug-fix: BQSR applied twice when running variant calling using a recaled bam file


2015-03-02
1. add vqsr
2. support IONTORRENT platform

2015-01-16

1. Bring the code to be compatible with GATK 3.3

2. Add support for different variant emit modes:
        --emit_mode=variant     Emit confident variants only (default)
        --emit_mode=confident   Emit confident variants or reference
        --emit_mode=all         Emit all sites
   Applicable to both Genotyper and Haplotyper.

3. Add the ability to generate graphical(pdf) outputs for various reports:
     o  metrics
        - MeanQualityByCycle
        - QualDistribution
        - GCBias
     o  BQSR

2014-12-18

1, Add command line options to set calling or emitting confidence thresholds:
        --algo Genotyper --emit_conf=10 --call_conf=30
   Applicable to both Genotyper and Haplotyper.

2, Add command line option to set minimum pruning factor in local assembly:
        --algo Haplotyper --prune_factor=3
   Applicable to Haplotyper.

3, Add command line option to set chromosome region filters:
        driver -c /path/to/filter.bed
   This is a driver level option, therefore applicable to algos.

4, Generate additional variant annotations. Here's the full list,
        AC, AF, AN, DP, MLEAC, MLEAF, MQ, MQ0, QD, FS,
        BaseQRankSum, ClippingRankSum, MQRankSum, ReadPosRankSum
